---
published: false
title: Ultra lessons in 9 simple hours - Halliburton Trail 100
layout: post
---
The sound I was hearing was my stomach grumbling. To be more precise, it was a hollow gurgle, pulsating rhythmically with each of my footsteps, like a baby not quite enjoying a “horsey ride” at 170 bounces per minute. I was about 45 km into the 50-mile (80km) Haliburton Forest trail race, shuffling ever closer to “farther-than-I-had-ever-run-shuffled-before” territory. And it was lunch time.

I signed up for this madness on the last day of registration, two days before the actual event. It’s not that I wasn’t committed: at the beginning of 2015, maybe a bit earlier, I had got it into my head that I was going to run a 50-miler. Having run precisely one marathon prior, some masochistic-mid-life-crisis part of me decided that Marathons were boring and I needed to try something that was beyond my own sense of reasonableness. Haliburton worked logistically, the time and place looked good, so it was decided.

But I waited until the last possible minute to truly hit the “commit” button. Perhaps I was waiting to see if some sudden injury, or act of god, or unexpected rash would swoop in and derail my plans. Or maybe I was just scared: “As long as I’m not signed up, I don’t really have to worry about it.” Whatever the reason, it didn’t matter, because at 5:30 am on that cool Saturday morning, I found myself standing in the dark with a hundred or so other committed souls, waiting to plunge headlong (or at least trot gingerly) into the unknown.

We had arrived the evening before, with plans to camp on site. Elise, my wife, and our two young boys had agreed to be my crew for the race, camp out, and maybe have a little fun for the weekend. Haliburton Forest is privately-owned and quite expansive: “80,000 acres of rolling hardwood forests, beautiful lakes, meandering rivers and extensive wetlands.” (from their website, and an accurate description) The entrance to the park and accompanying series of cabins give it a rustic “logging camp” feel. It feels a bit wild, by Southern Ontario standards, and that’s a good thing. We arrived with enough daylight left to pick up my race package, identify the critical locations (bathrooms), and set up our tents in the group camping area, which flanks a dirt road that would become the start/finish/100-mile turnaround “chute”. Did I mention that there was a hundred-mile race?

The Haliburton course is out-and-back on a combination of forest roads and trails. There are various distances to run, from 12 km to the signature 100-mile race, which requires you to complete the course twice. I had made up my mind arbitrarily that I didn’t consider a distance “ultra” until it hit the 50-mile mark and that I expected that the “true” ultra experience would probably not be had unless you ran 100. This 50-miler would help me determine if 100 was in the realm of possibility, or whether it would be my first and last foray into ultra distance.

That evening, though, none of that mattered. It was just lovely to be out in the park as the sun set, with fellow runners milling about or sitting around camp fires, sharing stories from years past, some proudly sporting 100-mile hoodies from previous races. The mood was light, oddly calm, and friendly. 

As I waited outside the “comfort station,” the inky darkness, unpolluted by city lights, treated us to shooting stars and tiny satellites drifting by. “The best part about running a hundred-miler,” said an anonymous figure in the dark, “is when you are running in the forest in the middle of the night and you take a moment to look up. Will you be running at night?” he asked. “No, I’m doing the 50.” I replied. “You picked a good one,” said the voice before vanishing into the darkness. Though a tiny part of me wanted to seek out that “best part”, it would have to wait until another time. But now, a little planning.

I felt wholly under-planned for the race. The week prior had been chaotic. We had spent the summer out west and between jet-lag, two young children and the return to school, there hadn’t been a lot of time to think, let alone prepare for a race. And my strategy for reducing pre-race stress was to avoid thinking about it. So, as Elise and I sat in our tent with flashlights, I took my first really good look at the course map. From training, I knew I could run 40 or even 50 km with minimal nutrition - beyond that distance was unknown. We planned for them to meet me at Aid Station 6 on the way out and 6 and 4 on the way back. That would put them at 30 km, 50 km and 65 km. The rest we would play by ear and I reckoned if I made it to 65 km, regardless of my condition, I could drag myself to the finish line.

My strategy for the race was pretty simple:
run slow - try for “no effort” for as long as possible. AKA: stay aerobic
walk up hills; don’t bomb down them
eat when I’m hungry, drink when I’m thirsty
run my own race, be in the moment, and enjoy!
(oh yeah, and drink Coke if I started to get foggy)

If I followed this race plan I figured one of two things would happen: Either I would get past the 50 km mark and things would get progressively harder, necessitating hiking, scraping, clawing or crawling my way to the finish; or, if the stars aligned, I would find some deeply stored reserve which would allow me to joyfully skip to the finish. Okay, maybe not, but I could dream.

The first half went as close to “expected” as I could have hoped. The starting pack quickly fragmented, roughly by distance - the 50 km racers running slightly faster, the 100-milers, slower. Whatever the pace, I could generally find someone to run with and absorb the wealth of experience that was on the trail that day. For much of the first 25 km, I ran behind David Collins, an ultra veteran with over 60 ultra distance races to date, including 5 races on the Haliburton course. “Run slow,” he said. “If you are running your 50 k pace, you are going to die. And walk up hills.”

As we snaked our way gently through the single-track, with the makeup of the group constantly shifting, conversation ranged from other races, V02 max and the durability of Fit Bits to the much-coveted but seldom experienced 100-mile midnight gnome sightings. “I kept seeing lawn chairs,” said a voice from behind me. The pleasant pace and chatter kept everyone gliding down the forest trail, barely noticing the slippery roots and rocks as they passed underfoot.

The first big change happened just after Aid Station 5. We had exited the gnarlier section of the course and forest roads began to dominate. The 50 k racers hit their turnaround point and were coming back at us and the 100-milers understandably took a much more leisurely approach to aid stations than the 50’s. I was feeling good so I ran through AS 5 and then, quite abruptly, I was alone. I was also excited to get to AS 6 as that is where my family would be, and I knew they had cake. The tantalizing thoughts of icing almost silenced the tiny voice whispering “Run slow. Run slow. The cake will wait. It’s not going anywhere.”

Running for a long time will tug at your personality. It can pull out the best: “Yay, I feel so great! I’m so fast! I can do this forever!” which can then turn into the worst: “Why am I so stupid? Why did I start so fast? I hate these shoes! I hate all of the people passing me… these ‘natural runners’. If I were built like that, I would be so much faster…” And these vacillations can last for minutes. Or hours. When I was running with others, I could rely on their pacing to guide me. Now that I was alone, my brain was taking over and though I am not a “fast runner” I am impatient. If left unchecked, I will start to run faster, and focus on (read: lament) the finish instead of revelling in the journey. If there is one lesson I learned that day on the trail it is that ultra running is about patience. No matter how fast you go, you are going to be out there for a long time. Practicing patience can mean the difference between enjoyment and suffering; between finishing strong or not finishing at all. “Patience. There is a long way to go. Just stick to the plan and keep putting one foot in front of the other.” This became my mantra for the rest of the day. Well, almost the rest of it.

30 km did arrive and my family was there to greet me. The Haliburton aid stations were great. I would describe them as happy, helpful places that pleasantly punctuate the solitude and possible suffering that one might experience along the course. The array and care taken with the wares was impressive and they were staffed by friendly people that genuinely wanted to help you. Having family there was a bonus that cannot be underestimated. Say what you want about the benefits of sugary concoctions, a child’s hug or a spouse’s kiss can float you along as well as any gel. And they gave me cake.

Being part of a runner’s support crew seems like a pretty thankless job: Wait around for hours for your runner, and when they arrive, they are in a hurry to get out of there. I was still feeling good when I came into AS 6, so I quickly said good-bye to my wife and kids and told them I’d see them back in the same place, at 50 km.

As far as race formats go, out-and-back courses are slightly mentally tougher than point-to-point courses, but they do offer some benefits. Not only do you get to know the course features that you will encounter in the second half of the race, you encounter runners coming in the opposite direction. This allows you to cheer on and occasionally high-five your fellow runners in mid-stride and, as you approach the turn-around, it lets you see who is ahead of you. This first happened to me at around 35 km when the lead 50-miler (Benoit) came running towards me. “He looks fresh… about an hour ahead of me… that seems about right.” As I moved steadily towards the turnaround, a smattering of others, 50 and 100-milers: green-shirted guy (Matt) that I recognized from Endurance Tap (the Toronto-based maple syrup energy gel), a minimalist (shirtless guy) several others, and another shirtless guy (Jack Kilislian) all looking better than I was starting to feel. 

The turnaround point on the course is cruelly placed about 700 metres beyond aid station 7. You see the aid station, think you’ve hit the turnaround, then the bad news. Of course, when you do pass the turnaround, you get to see who is just behind you: another green-shirted guy (turns out his name is also Matt) and an Asian guy in black and orange whom I recognized from earlier because of the visor dangling from his pack. “That’s it! Half way! Next stop, family.” I downed a slice of watermelon and a paper cup of Coke (see my race strategy above), thanked the aid station folks and was off.

Running far puts into focus how “relative” distance and time are. If you’ve never run before, 5 km seems like a good distance, 10 km seems really far, and a marathon seems totally out of the question. But when you start training for an “ultra” distance, your short runs might be 15 km. Over time, banging out a half-marathon-length easy run on a Saturday starts to seem strangely normal and the prospect of running 40 or 50 k, not nausea-inducing. Relativity, though, cuts both ways (I think Einstein said that). The longest distance between aid stations at Halliburton is the 10 km between 6 and 7, the stretch I was currently running. Relatively speaking, this became the second longest 10 km I had ever run.

I’ve heard that it is impossible to make a sound that will annoy yourself but the rumbling of my stomach was beginning to irritate me. I might have gotten angry if I had the energy for that emotion. “Where is that #*$@ing aid station?” I kept expecting to see it around the next bend. Instead, I was seeing that damned shirtless guy (Jack) who kept coming in and out of view ahead of me. He would run up hills, I would walk them. He would lose me on the hills, then he would slowly creep back into my sight on the flats. “This looks familiar. I’m sure the aid station is just ahead.” This pattern seemed to go on for a minor eternity and I had exhausted my on-board supply of home-made date balls. I could feel a wave of despair washing over me and a tell-tale fog descending onto my brain. “So is this it? Is this where the suffering starts?” I was slowly closing on Jack, but not because I had any desire to run faster.

I have a certain envy of minimalists like Jack, who can head into the trails with nothing but shoes, shorts and a hand-held water bottle. To run free from the encumbrances of gear, like Anton Krupicka with less hair. He’d probably run naked if it were warmer.

Jack’s naked back was leaving Aid Station 6 by the time I staggered in, feeling foggy, empty, but happy to see my family. My mood was not as cheery as the last time we met: “It’s getting hard now. I’m really hungry.” Cake wouldn’t do this time. Ando (our six-year-old) tried to surprise me with an apple he had roasted over the camp fire, but unable to muster good dadhood, I staggered around, eyes trying to land on something that resembled a meal. I settled on a tub of high fat yogurt which I imagined could be warm ice cream. Elise helped me refill my on-board stores and ushered me on my way. “See you in 15 km!”

Alone again, but not for long - footsteps behind me. On a curve I caught sight of green shirt Matt #2 behind me and gaining steadily, and then I was looking at his back moving away from me. Soon after, Asian guy (Do Tran) passed me looking like a possessed bumble bee. “I guess this is where guys are turning it on” the voice in my head said, but, with 30 km to go: “Patience. There is a long way to go. Run your own race and keep putting one foot in front of the other.” So I watched them go. 

They remained within sight and eventually we all caught up with Jack, except Do, who charged ahead. We watched him wipe out ahead of us and then he was gone. As we wound back into the single track, the three of us now running stride-for-stride were steady and content - content to let Jack set the pace, that is. We came upon Do again, this time standing beside the trail, rooting through his pack. “You okay?” “Yeah,” he said, and something about equipment as we left him. Again we were three, running quiet save our steps and nature around us.

Do eventually caught up and we ran as four again, still letting Jack lead the way. But as we approached an open descent, the bumble bee appeared again, and Do barrelled down the hill, opening up a gap between him and the group. Trouble is, he missed the course markers. “Anyone going with him?” asked Jack. Honestly, I would have, if Jack wasn’t leading. I would later learn that Jack Kilislian was an Ontario Ultra Grand Slammer, meaning he had completed three 100-mile races in a season. A solid veteran of these races, he knew how to follow course flags. “Hey! Wrong way!” yelled Matt, before I could really even process what had happened. Somewhere behind us expletives were uttered.

Between Aid Station 5 and 4, at roughly 60 km, something strange started to happen, something miraculous: I felt myself slowing down. This time it wasn’t because I was afraid of blowing up, nor because my energy was flagging. I was slowing down to avoid running into the back of Jack. Somehow, I was beginning to feel good.

I had asked Elise and boys to meet me at Aid Station 4, 65 km, because I had no idea what was going to happen at that point, but by the time the three of us rolled in, I knew what I wanted to do. “I’ve got to run,” I told Elise as she asked me what I needed. We stole a farewell kiss and I was off, feeling new energy and excitement. Jack wasted no time there either and it was a good thing too, as in my excitement I was totally prepared to run off course. “You don’t want to do that.” Saved by the veteran again.

I fell in behind Jack again, but he could sense my nervous energy. “If you want pass, just let me know, otherwise I’ll just keep going,” he said. With 14 km to go, it was time. “Okay, we’ll see how this goes,” I said to Jack as I passed him in an open section, “maybe you’ll see me later,” and then I ran.

Some of the most beautiful parts of the course are the long stretches of single-track that wind their way through deciduous forest. The trail in these sections is lightly rolling, rooty and technical and tests the brain as much as the legs. For the first time that day I was racing! I was flying over rocks and roots, scampering up hills and, ouch! ouch! quads! descending carefully. Though this was much farther than I’d ever run before, I was feeling great and I knew the next aid station would be arriving soon, marking the final 10 km loop around MacDonald Lake to the finish.

The aid station captain said: “Go straight for about a kilometre, then turn right between the white signs. Around the lake and we’ll see you back here in about 10 k,” and it was perfectly timed, as at that moment, I really needed someone to tell me what to do. The white signs marked the course for the 50 and 100-mile runners but they might as well have read: “welcome to the pain cave.” My late-race burst of energy was rapidly turning into a teeth-gritting ride on a lactic acid roller coaster. Remember how 40-50 km was the second longest 10 km I had ever run?

Along this ride I encountered the other minimalist and Petit Slammer, Steve Bridson who asked me about Jack. They were tied in points and Jack was his motivation to keep pushing. 

“Keep pushing. You’ve been running a while, you must be almost there…“Do you know Jack?” he asked. “Uh…” “Guy running with no shirt? Glasses?” “Yeah, he’s not that far back.” “Damn!” said Steve, “we’re tied in points, and if he beats me he wins. He’s my motivation!” 

No bare chests. No green shirts. No bumble bees.




It punishes you for not paying attention and rewards you for acting with awareness. 

How much of the race kit that we carry is the result of worry, that we’ll be too cold or too warm or won’t have enough water or food, or speed or style? Was this so-called “race vest” I was wearing, really just baggage? Are these the random musings of low blood sugar?
